# Budget New World Build for Mutations

If you want to get started with mutated expedition runs but don’t know where to start, this guide is aimed at helping you.  I won’t explain mutations and how they work since there are already some really good guides out there such as this one https://newworldfans.com/articles/new-world-dungeon-mutation-guide.  My guide is intended to be an extension onto the guides that are already out there to help you put together a starter build to get you going in mutations.

## Mutation Difficulty Explained
While it’s explained for the most part in the guide I listed above, I’ll give a quick overview in layman's terms.  Basically mutations are regular expeditions that have been made more challenging with increased rewards.  They range in difficulty from level 1 (referred to as M1) up to level 10 (referred to as M10).  Levels 1 and 2 are listed as Normal difficulty and aren’t that challenging.  As long as most members of the group have decent gear (615+), a lower gear score (~550) person can run one of these without much difficulty for themselves or the group.  As you work your way up in difficulty, gear score becomes more of a strict requirement.  As an example, in a M9 or M10 difficulty expedition, most mobs will kill a low gear score player in one hit.  Also it’s important to note that gear score starts to average out across all players in the higher difficulty mutations, so not only will you have a hard time, but also the other players with you will get hit harder and do less damage due to your gear score pulling theirs down.  In the beginning, stick with M1 and M2 until you can get your gear score up to around 605 or so.

## DPS Role - Armor, Weapon, and Stats
I primarily play as a melee DPS player so I’m going to start here.  

#### Weapon Type
If you’re trying to decide which weapon type to use, honestly just go with what you have the most fun playing. While some weapon types do more damage to specific mob types based on their weaknesses (as detailed in this guide https://newworldfans.com/articles/damage-type-vs-mob-types), the difference is minimal and it doesn’t really matter in lower mutation runs (M1-M7).  The exception is Musket which is currently (as of writing this in Dec 2022), a really poor weapon choice for expeditions.

#### Weapon Perks
While ideally you want to have weapons aligned with specific mob types (those with perks like Corrupted Bane, Angry Earth Bane, Ancient Bane, and Lost Bane) this isn’t always possible.  So start with weapons that have 2-3 good perks for your play style.  If you’re not sure what the better perks are best, here is a good guide that lists the perks for each play style https://www.resources.bagginstv.com/ (S tier is the highest followed by A, then B, with F being perks that are either completely worthless or close to it).  An example weapon with good perks would be a hatchet with Refreshing Torrent and Vicious (both considered S tier).  A 590 gear score version of that should sell on the market for a few hundred coins and is considered a very good starter weapon.

#### Armor Weight
As a DPS player, it’s important to know the key differences between Light and Medium armor loadouts.  The full details are explained here: https://newworldfans.com/articles/armor-weights-in-new-world but the summary is the combination of pieces of armor you equip will collectively put you at a specific weight setting (Light, Medium, or Heavy) and the bonuses apply based on that overall weight setting.  There are several combinations of gear weights that can be worn to put you in the different equipment loads, and they’re outlined in that guide.  It is suggested to go with one of the optimal loadouts detailed in that guide and shown in an image on the right on this site. https://pvebuilds.xyz/builds/  An example optimal loadout for medium is heavy helmet, heavy chest, light legs, medium gloves, and medium shoes.  That gives the most armor mitigation while still keeping you in a medium loadout.  When deciding whether to go with light, medium, or heavy loadouts as a DPS, stick with medium or light. Only tanks should use heavy armor since it has no DPS bonus and severely limits your mobility.  As a beginner DPS, I recommend a medium armor loadout until you get really proficient at dodging and know all the expedition mechanics.  Medium armor has a 10% DPS bonus over heavy and still has pretty good dodge mobility while giving you good survivability in case you do get hit. One last note is that a shield adds weight to you but provides no benefit unless you are actively using a sword.  You really shouldn’t wear a shield unless you’re a tank or a player that really wants to use a sword, and then stick with the lighter round or kite shields to keep your weight at the target level.

#### Armor Perks
Similar to above, use the perks tier list here https://www.resources.bagginstv.com/ and find armor that has 2-3 good perks that align with your play style. For the M1-2 mutation you can get away with any perks that align with your weapons, abilities, and play style.  For more M3+ mutations you should start looking for the S and A-tier perks and begin building out enemy-specific gear (e.g. gear with Corrupted Ward) that aligns with the mob types in the expedition.  Sticking with the budget-build theme, a good starter piece of armor could have Corrupted Ward and Refreshing Evasion and 15 STR, DEX, or INT with 10 CON.  That will likely cost a few hundred coin and is great to get you started with mutations that have corrupted enemies (Dynasty, Tempest, and Depths). Eventually as you get more experience in mutations and have the Umbral shards to start upgrading better gear, you can start buying or crafting more costly stuff with 3 perks, but that’s really only required in M9+ mutation runs.

## Abilities & Stat Assignment
The ability choices are up to you as well since most are at least pretty good, but if you want to find recommended abilities and stat assignments, I recommend the builds found here: https://pvebuilds.xyz/builds/.  Make sure you click the specific enemy type in the top left of that site to get to the specific recommended builds.  Note that attribute assignments are in three categories (Beginner, Intermediate, and Pro).  I can’t stress the importance of starting with Beginner attributes and using those for the first ~50 expedition runs until you really have a solid understanding of the expeditions and every fight mechanic.  Having 200 CON is going to reduce your DPS by a small amount but give you a huge amount of survival.  As an example, if you have 200 CON in an M7+ expedition you can survive the heaviest boss mob hit (with like 50 HP left), but any lower CON and you’ll die.  Throughout the expedition with the Beginner build you’ll be able to get hit a few times and still live, but using the “Pro” build where they list the use of 5 CON, you’ll get killed in 2-3 hits from trash mobs.  One final note is to pay attention to the bonuses at each of the 50 point marks within the stats assignment screen.  Getting to 100 CON gives you extra health and getting to 200 gives you extra mitigation.  So if you’re close to one of those levels, go ahead and put the extra points in to get there.  Make sure to review the levels in each stat.  Some of the more important ones are:
- 50 STR gives 10% more damage to melee attacks
- 50 DEX gives 10% more crit chance
- 50 INT gives 10% more crit damage

This is important in case you’re running a weapon that benefits from both two stats.  Instead of going all in to one of them, add 50 of the secondary stat to get that extra perk.  As an example, I use Hatchet and I often use a build that is 300 STR, 50 DEX, and the rest CON to get the perk at 300 STR and the perk at 50 DEX.


# Tank
This is very similar to everything mentioned above but you’ll want to have all Heavy gear. Baggins has done a really thorough job of explaining everything in his guide here. https://www.resources.bagginstv.com/tank-guide 

# Healer
Also similar to above, but you’ll want to stick with Light gear.  Baggins also has a great guide here. https://www.resources.bagginstv.com/healer-guide 


